#####################################
HOWTO write an External for Pure Data
#####################################

Pure Data (aka Pd) is a graphical real-time computer-music system that follows the tradition of IRCAMs ISPW-max.

Although plenty of functions are built into Pd, it is sometimes a pain or simply impossible to create a patch with a certain functionality out of the given primitives and combinations of these.

Therefore, Pd can be extended with self made primitives (“objects”) that are written in complex programming-languages, like C/C++.

This document aims to explain how to write such primitives in C, the popular language that was used to realize Pd. 

Table of Contents
*****************

.. contents::

definitions and prerequisites
*****************************

Pd refers to the graphical real-time computer-music environment *Pure
Data* by Miller S. Puckette.

To fully understand this document, it is necessary to be acquainted with
Pd and to have a general understanding of programming techniques
especially in C.

To write externals yourself, a C-compiler that supports the
ANSI-C-Standard, like the *Gnu C-compiler* (gcc) on linux-systems or
*Visual-C++* on windows-platforms, will be necessary.

classes, instances, objects
===========================

Pd is written in the programming-language C. Due to its graphical
nature, Pd is a *object-oriented* system. Unfortunately C does not
support very well the use of classes. Thus the resulting source-code is
not as elegant as C++-code would be, for instance.

In this document, the expression *class* refers to the realisation of a
concept combining data and manipulators on this data.

Concrete *instances of a class* are called *objects*.

internals, externals and libraries
==================================

To avoid confusion of ideas, the expressions *internal*, *external* and
*library* should be explained here.

Internal
--------

An *internal* is a class that is built into Pd. Plenty of primitives,
such as “+”, “pack” or “sig” are *internals*.

External
--------

An *external* is a class that is not built into Pd but is loaded at
runtime. Once loaded into Pd’s memory, *externals* cannot be
distinguished from *internals* any more.

Library
-------

A *library* is a collection of *externals* that are compiled into a
single binary-file.

*Library*-files have to follow a system dependent naming convention:

+-----------+---------------------+--------------------+---------------+
| library   | linux               | irix               | Win32         |
+===========+=====================+====================+===============+
| my\_lib   | my\_lib.pd\_linux   | my\_lib.pd\_irix   | my\_lib.dll   |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------------+---------------+

The simplest form of a *library* includes exactly one *external* bearing
the same name as the *library*.

Unlike *externals*, *libraries* can be imported by Pd with special
operations. After a *library* has been imported, all included
*externals* have been loaded into memory and are available as objects.

Pd supports two modes to import *libraries*:

-  via the command line-option “-lib my\_lib”

-  by creating an object “my\_lib”

The first method loads a *library* when Pd is started. This method is
preferably used for *libraries* that contain several *externals*.

The other method should be used for *libraries* that contain exactly one
*external* bearing the same name. Pd checks first, whether a class named
“my\_lib” is already loaded. If this is not the case [#]_, all paths are
searched for a file called “my\_lib.pd\_linux” [#]_. If such file is
found, all included *externals* are loaded into memory by calling a
routine ``my_lib_setup()``. After loading, a class “my\_lib” is (again)
looked for as a (newly loaded) *external*. If so, an instance of this
class is created, else the instantiation fails and an error is printed.
Anyhow, all *external*-classes declared in the *library* are loaded by
now.

.. [#] If a class “my\_lib” is already existent, an object “my\_lib” will be instantiated and the procedure is done. Thus, no *library* has been loaded. Therefore no *library* that is named like an already used class-name like, say, “abs”, can be loaded.

.. [#] or another system-dependent filename-extensions (s.a.)


Writing externals
*****************

my first external: helloworld
=============================

Usually the first attempt learning a programming-language is a “hello
world”-application.

In our case, an object class should be created, that prints the line
“hello world!!” to the standard error every time it is triggered with a
“bang”-message.

the interface to Pd
-------------------

To write a Pd-external a well-defined interface is needed. This is
provided in the header-file “m\_pd.h”.

::

    #include "m_pd.h"

a class and its data space
--------------------------

First a new class has to be prepared and the data space for this class
has to be defined.

::

    static t_class *helloworld_class;

    typedef struct _helloworld {
      t_object  x_obj;
    } t_helloworld;

``hello_worldclass`` is going to be a pointer to the new class.

The structure ``t_helloworld`` (of the type ``_helloworld``) is the data
space of the class.

An absolutely necessary element of the data space is a variable of the
type ``t_object``, which is used to store internal object-properties
like the graphical presentation of the object or data about inlets and
outlets.

``t_object`` has to be the first entry in the structure !

Because a simple “hello world”-application needs no variables, the
structure is empty apart from the ``t_object``.

method space
------------

Apart from the data space, a class needs a set of manipulators (methods)
to manipulate the data with.

If a message is sent to an instance of our class, a method is called.
These methods are the interfaces to the message system of Pd. On
principal they have no return argument and are therefore of the type
``void``.

::

    void helloworld_bang(t_helloworld *x)
    {
      post("Hello world !!");
    }

This method has an argument of the type ``t_helloworld``, which would
enable us to manipulate the data space.

Since we only want to output “Hello world!” (and, by the way, our data
space is quite sparse), we renounce a manipulation.

The command ``post(char *c,...)`` sends a string to the standard error.
A carriage return is added automatically. Apart from this, the
``post``-command works like the C-command ``printf()``.

generation of a new class
-------------------------

To generate a new class, information of the data space and the method
space of this class, have to be passed to Pd when a library is loaded.

On loading a new library “my\_lib”, Pd tries to call a function
“my\_lib\_setup()”. This function (or functions called by it) declares
the new classes and their properties. It is only called once, when the
library is loaded. If the function-call fails (e.g., because no function
of the specified name is present) no external of the library will be
loaded.

::

    void helloworld_setup(void)
    {
      helloworld_class = class_new(gensym("helloworld"),
            (t_newmethod)helloworld_new,
            0, sizeof(t_helloworld),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 0);

      class_addbang(helloworld_class, helloworld_bang);
    }

class\_new
^^^^^^^^^^

The function ``class_new`` creates a new class and returns a pointer to
this prototype.

The first argument is the symbolic name of the class.

The next two arguments define the constructor and destructor of the
class.

Whenever a class object is created in a Pd-patch, the class-constructor
``(t_newmethod)helloworld_new`` instantiates the object and initialises
the data space.

Whenever an object is destroyed (either by closing the containing patch
or by deleting the object from the patch) the destructor frees the
dynamically reserved memory. The allocated memory for the static data
space is automatically reserved and freed.

Therefore we do not have to provide a destructor in this example, the
argument is set to “0”.

To enable Pd to reserve and free enough memory for the static data
space, the size of the data structure has to be passed as the fourth
argument.

The fifth argument has influence on the graphical representation of the
class objects. The default-value is ``CLASS_DEFAULT`` or simply “0”.

The remaining arguments define the arguments of an object and its type.

Up to six numeric and symbolic object-arguments can be defined via
``A_DEFFLOAT`` and ``A_DEFSYMBOL``. If more arguments are to be passed
to the object or if the order of atom types should by more flexible,
``A_GIMME`` can be used for passing an arbitrary list of atoms.

The list of object-arguments is terminated by “0”. In this example we
have no object-arguments at all for the class.

class\_addbang
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We still have to add a method space to the class.

``class_addbang`` adds a method for a “bang”-message to the class that
is defined in the first argument. The added method is defined in the
second argument.

constructor: instantiation of an object
---------------------------------------

Each time, an object is created in a Pd-patch, the constructor that is
defined with the ``class_new``-command, generates a new instance of the
class.

The constructor has to be of type ``void *``.

::

    void *helloworld_new(void)
    {
      t_helloworld *x = (t_helloworld *)pd_new(helloworld_class);

      return (void *)x;
    }

The arguments of the constructor-method depend on the object-arguments
defined with ``class_new``.

+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| ``class_new``-argument   | constructor-argument                      |
+==========================+===========================================+
| ``A_DEFFLOAT``           | ``t_floatarg f``                          |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| ``A_DEFSYMBOL``          | ``t_symbol *s``                           |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| ``A_GIMME``              | ``t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv``   |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

Because there are no object-arguments for our “hello world”-class, the
constructor has anon too.

The function ``pd_new`` reserves memory for the data space, initialises
the variables that are internal to the object and returns a pointer to
the data space.

The type-cast to the data space is necessary.

Normally, the constructor would initialise the object-variables.
However, since we have none, this is not necessary.

The constructor has to return a pointer to the instantiated data space.

the code: helloworld
--------------------

::

    #include "m_pd.h"

    static t_class *helloworld_class;

    typedef struct _helloworld {
      t_object  x_obj;
    } t_helloworld;

    void helloworld_bang(t_helloworld *x)
    {
      post("Hello world !!");
    }

    void *helloworld_new(void)
    {
      t_helloworld *x = (t_helloworld *)pd_new(helloworld_class);

      return (void *)x;
    }

    void helloworld_setup(void) {
      helloworld_class = class_new(gensym("helloworld"),
            (t_newmethod)helloworld_new,
            0, sizeof(t_helloworld),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 0);
      class_addbang(helloworld_class, helloworld_bang);
    }

a simple external: counter
==========================

Now we want to realize a simple counter as an external. A “bang”-trigger
outputs the counter-value on the outlet and afterwards increases the
counter-value by 1.

This class is similar to the previous one, but the data space is
extended by a variable “counter” and the result is written as a message
to an outlet instead of a string to the standard error.

object-variables
----------------

Of course, a counter needs a state-variable to store the actual
counter-value.

State-variables that belong to class instances belong to the data space.

::

    typedef struct _counter {
      t_object  x_obj;
      int i_count;
    } t_counter;

The integer variable ``i_count`` stores the counter-value.

object-arguments
----------------

It is quite useful for a counter, if a initial value can be defined by
the user. Therefore this initial value should be passed to the object at
creation-time.

::

    void counter_setup(void) {
      counter_class = class_new(gensym("counter"),
            (t_newmethod)counter_new,
            0, sizeof(t_counter),
            CLASS_DEFAULT,
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

      class_addbang(counter_class, counter_bang);
    }

So we have an additional argument in the function ``class_new``:
``A_DEFFLOAT`` tells Pd, that the object needs one argument of the type
``t_floatarg``. If no argument is passed, this will default to “0”.

constructor
-----------

The constructor has some new tasks. On the one hand, a variable value
has to be initialised, on the other hand, an outlet for the object has
to be created.

::

    void *counter_new(t_floatarg f)
    {
      t_counter *x = (t_counter *)pd_new(counter_class);

      x->i_count=f;
      outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_float);

      return (void *)x;
    }

The constructor-method has one argument of type ``t_floatarg`` as
declared in the setup-routine by ``class_new``. This argument is used to
initialise the counter.

A new outlet is created with the function ``outlet_new``. The first
argument is a pointer to the interna of the object the new outlet is
created for.

The second argument is a symbolic description of the outlet-type. Since
out counter should output numeric values it is of type “float”.

``outlet_new`` returns a pointer to the new outlet and saves this very
pointer in the ``t_object``-variable ``x_obj.ob_outlet``. If only one
outlet is used, the pointer need not additionally be stored in the data
space. If more than one outlets are used, the pointers have to be stored
in the data space, because the ``t_object``-variable can only hold one
outlet pointer.

the counter method
------------------

When triggered, the counter value should be sent to the outlet and
afterwards be incremented by 1.

::

    void counter_bang(t_counter *x)
    {
      t_float f=x->i_count;
      x->i_count++;
      outlet_float(x->x_obj.ob_outlet, f);
    }

The function ``outlet_float`` sends a floating-point-value (second
argument) to the outlet that is specified by the first argument.

We first store the counter in a floating point-buffer. Afterwards the
counter is incremented and not before that the buffer variable is sent
to the outlet.

What appears to be unnecessary on the first glance, makes sense after
further inspection: The buffer variable has been realized as
``t_float``, since ``outlet_float`` expects a floating point-value and a
typecast is inevitable.

If the counter value was sent to the outlet before being incremented,
this could result in an unwanted (though well defined) behaviour: If the
counter-outlet directly triggered its own inlet, the counter-method
would be called although the counter value was not yet incremented.
Normally this is not what we want.

The same (correct) result could of course be obtained with a single
line, but this would obscure the *reentrant*-problem.

the code: counter
-----------------

::

    #include "m_pd.h"

    static t_class *counter_class;

    typedef struct _counter {
      t_object  x_obj;
      int i_count;
    } t_counter;

    void counter_bang(t_counter *x)
    {
      t_float f=x->i_count;
      x->i_count++;
      outlet_float(x->x_obj.ob_outlet, f);
    }

    void *counter_new(t_floatarg f)
    {
      t_counter *x = (t_counter *)pd_new(counter_class);

      x->i_count=f;
      outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_float);

      return (void *)x;
    }

    void counter_setup(void) {
      counter_class = class_new(gensym("counter"),
            (t_newmethod)counter_new,
            0, sizeof(t_counter),
            CLASS_DEFAULT,
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

      class_addbang(counter_class, counter_bang);
    }

a complex external: counter
===========================

The simple counter of the previous chapter can easily be extended to
more complexity. It might be quite useful to be able to reset the
counter to an initial value, to set upper and lower boundaries and to
control the step-width. Each overrun should send a “bang”-Message to a
second outlet and reset the counter to the initial value.

extended data space
-------------------

::

    typedef struct _counter {
      t_object  x_obj;
      int i_count;
      t_float step;
      int i_down, i_up;
      t_outlet *f_out, *b_out;
    } t_counter;

The data space has been extended to hold variables for step width and
upper and lower boundaries. Furthermore pointers for two outlets have
been added.

extension of the class
----------------------

The new class objects should have methods for different messages, like
“set” and “reset”. Therefore the method space has to be extended too.

::

      counter_class = class_new(gensym("counter"),
            (t_newmethod)counter_new,
            0, sizeof(t_counter),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 
            A_GIMME, 0);

The class generator ``class_new`` has been extended by the argument
``A_GIMME``. This enables a dynamic number of arguments to be passed at
the instantiation of the object.

::

      class_addmethod(counter_class,
            (t_method)counter_reset,
            gensym("reset"), 0);

``class_addmethod`` adds a method for an arbitrary selector to an class.

The first argument is the class the method (second argument) will be
added to.

The third argument is the symbolic selector that should be associated
with the method.

The remaining “0”-terminated arguments describe the list of atoms that
follows the selector.

::

      class_addmethod(counter_class,
            (t_method)counter_set, gensym("set"),
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);
      class_addmethod(counter_class,
            (t_method)counter_bound, gensym("bound"),
            A_DEFFLOAT, A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

A method for “set” followed by a numerical value is added, as well as a
method for the selector “bound” followed by two numerical values.

::

      class_sethelpsymbol(counter_class, gensym("help-counter"));

If a Pd-object is right-clicked, a help-patch describing the
object-class can be opened. By default, this patch is located in the
directory “\ *doc/5.reference/*\ ” and is named like the symbolic class
name.

An alternative help-patch can be defined with the
``class_sethelpsymbol``-command.

construction of in- and outlets
-------------------------------

When creating the object, several arguments should be passed by the
user.

::

    void *counter_new(t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv)

Because of the declaration of arguments in the ``class_new``-function
with ``A_GIMME``, the constructor has following arguments:

+--------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``t_symbol *s``    | the symbolic name,                             |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|                    | that was used for object creation              |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``int argc``       | the number of arguments passed to the object   |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| ``t_atom *argv``   | a pointer to a list of argc atoms              |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------+

::

      t_float f1=0, f2=0;

      x->step=1;
      switch(argc){
      default:
      case 3:
        x->step=atom_getfloat(argv+2);
      case 2:
        f2=atom_getfloat(argv+1);
      case 1:
        f1=atom_getfloat(argv);
        break;
      case 0:
        break;
      }
      if (argc<2)f2=f1;
      x->i_down = (f1<f2)?f1:f2;
      x->i_up   = (f1>f2)?f1:f2;

      x->i_count=x->i_down;

If three arguments are passed, these should be the *lower boundary*, the
*upper boundary* and the *step width*.

If only two arguments are passed, the step-width defaults to “1”. If
only one argument is passed, this should be the *initial value* of the
counter with step-width of “1”.

::

      inlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->x_obj.ob_pd,
            gensym("list"), gensym("bound"));

The function ``inlet_new`` creates a new “active” inlet. “Active” means,
that a class-method is called each time a message is sent to an “active”
inlet.

Due to the software-architecture, the first inlet is always “active”.

The first two arguments of the ``inlet_new``-function are pointers to
the interna of the object and to the graphical presentation of the
object.

The symbolic selector that is specified by the third argument is to be
substituted by another symbolic selector (fourth argument) for this
inlet.

Because of this substitution of selectors, a message on a certain right
inlet can be treated as a message with a certain selector on the
leftmost inlet.

This means:

-  The substituting selector has to be declared by ``class_addmethod``
   in the setup-routine.

-  It is possible to simulate a certain right inlet, by sending a
   message with this inlet’s selector to the leftmost inlet.

-  It is not possible to add methods for more than one selector to a
   right inlet. Particularly it is not possible to add a universal
   method for arbitrary selectors to a right inlet.

.. raw:: html

   <!-- -->

::

      floatinlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->step);

``floatinlet_new`` generates a new “passive” inlet for numerical values.
“Passive” inlets allow parts of the data space-memory to be written
directly from outside. Therefore it is not possible to check for illegal
inputs.

The first argument is a pointer to the internal infrastructure of the
object. The second argument is the address in the data space-memory,
where other objects can write too.

“Passive” inlets can be created for pointers, symbolic or numerical
(floating point [#]_ ) values.


::

      x->f_out = outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_float);
      x->b_out = outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_bang);

The pointers returned by ``outlet_new`` have to be saved in the
classdata space to be used later by the outlet-routines.

The order of the generation of inlets and outlets is important, since it
corresponds to the order of inlets and outlets in the graphical
representation of the object.

.. [#] That’s why the step-width of the classdata space is realized as t\_float.

extended method space
---------------------

The method for the “bang”-message has to full fill the more complex
tasks.

::

    void counter_bang(t_counter *x)
    {
      t_float f=x->i_count;
      int step = x->step;
      x->i_count+=step;
      if (x->i_down-x->i_up) {
        if ((step>0) && (x->i_count > x->i_up)) {
          x->i_count = x->i_down;
          outlet_bang(x->b_out);
        } else if (x->i_count < x->i_down) {
          x->i_count = x->i_up;
          outlet_bang(x->b_out);
        }
      }
      outlet_float(x->f_out, f);
    }

Each outlet is identified by the ``outlet_...``-functions via the
pointer to this outlets.

The remaining methods still have to be implemented:

::

    void counter_reset(t_counter *x)
    {
      x->i_count = x->i_down;
    }

    void counter_set(t_counter *x, t_floatarg f)
    {
      x->i_count = f;
    }

    void counter_bound(t_counter *x, t_floatarg f1, t_floatarg f2)
    {
      x->i_down = (f1<f2)?f1:f2;
      x->i_up   = (f1>f2)?f1:f2;
    }

the code: counter
-----------------

::

    #include "m_pd.h"

    static t_class *counter_class;

    typedef struct _counter {
      t_object  x_obj;
      int i_count;
      t_float step;
      int i_down, i_up;
      t_outlet *f_out, *b_out;
    } t_counter;

    void counter_bang(t_counter *x)
    {
      t_float f=x->i_count;
      int step = x->step;
      x->i_count+=step;

      if (x->i_down-x->i_up) {
        if ((step>0) && (x->i_count > x->i_up)) {
          x->i_count = x->i_down;
          outlet_bang(x->b_out);
        } else if (x->i_count < x->i_down) {
          x->i_count = x->i_up;
          outlet_bang(x->b_out);
        }
      }

      outlet_float(x->f_out, f);
    }

    void counter_reset(t_counter *x)
    {
      x->i_count = x->i_down;
    }

    void counter_set(t_counter *x, t_floatarg f)
    {
      x->i_count = f;
    }

    void counter_bound(t_counter *x, t_floatarg f1, t_floatarg f2)
    {
      x->i_down = (f1<f2)?f1:f2;
      x->i_up   = (f1>f2)?f1:f2;
    }

    void *counter_new(t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv)
    {
      t_counter *x = (t_counter *)pd_new(counter_class);
      t_float f1=0, f2=0;

      x->step=1;
      switch(argc){
      default:
      case 3:
        x->step=atom_getfloat(argv+2);
      case 2:
        f2=atom_getfloat(argv+1);
      case 1:
        f1=atom_getfloat(argv);
        break;
      case 0:
        break;
      }
      if (argc<2)f2=f1;

      x->i_down = (f1<f2)?f1:f2;
      x->i_up   = (f1>f2)?f1:f2;

      x->i_count=x->i_down;

      inlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->x_obj.ob_pd,
            gensym("list"), gensym("bound"));
      floatinlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->step);

      x->f_out = outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_float);
      x->b_out = outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_bang);

      return (void *)x;
    }

    void counter_setup(void) {
      counter_class = class_new(gensym("counter"),
            (t_newmethod)counter_new,
            0, sizeof(t_counter),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 
            A_GIMME, 0);

      class_addbang  (counter_class, counter_bang);
      class_addmethod(counter_class,
            (t_method)counter_reset, gensym("reset"), 0);
      class_addmethod(counter_class, 
            (t_method)counter_set, gensym("set"),
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);
      class_addmethod(counter_class,
            (t_method)counter_bound, gensym("bound"),
            A_DEFFLOAT, A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

      class_sethelpsymbol(counter_class, gensym("help-counter"));
    }

a signal-external: pan~
=======================

Signal classes are normal Pd-classes, that offer additional methods for
signals.

All methods and concepts that can be realized with normal object classes
can therefore be realized with signal classes too.

Per agreement, the symbolic names of signal classes end with a tilde .

The class “pan” shall demonstrate, how signal classes are written.

A signal on the left inlet is mixed with a signal on the second inlet.
The mixing-factor between 0 and 1 is defined via a ``t_float``-message
on a third inlet.

variables of a signal class
---------------------------

Since a signal-class is only an extended normal class, there are no
principal differences between the data spaces.

::

    typedef struct _pan_tilde {
      t_object x_obj;

      t_sample f_pan;
      t_float  f;

      t_inlet *x_in2;
      t_inlet *x_in3;

      t_outlet*x_out;

    } t_pan_tilde;

Only one variable ``f_pan`` for the *mixing-factor* of the
panning-function is needed.

The other variable ``f`` is needed whenever a signal-inlet is needed
too. If no signal but only a float-message is present at a signal-inlet,
this variable is used to automatically convert the float to signal.

Finally, we have the members ``x_in2``, ``x_in3`` and ``x_out``, which
are needed to store handles to the various extra inlets (resp. outlets)
of the object.

signal-classes
--------------

::

    void pan_tilde_setup(void) {
      pan_tilde_class = class_new(gensym("pan~"),
            (t_newmethod)pan_tilde_new,
            (t_method)pan_tilde_free,
            sizeof(t_pan_tilde),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

      class_addmethod(pan_tilde_class,
            (t_method)pan_tilde_dsp, gensym("dsp"), A_CANT, 0);
      CLASS_MAINSIGNALIN(pan_tilde_class, t_pan_tilde, f);
    }

Something has changed with the ``class_new`` function: the third
argument specifies a “free-method” (aka *destructor*), which is called
whenever an instance of the object is to be deleted (just like the
“new-method” is called whenever an instance is to be created). In the
prior examples this was set to ``0`` (meaning: we don’t care), but in
this example we have to clean up some resources when we don’t need them
any more.

More interestingly, a method for signal-processing has to be provided by
each signal class.

Whenever Pd’s audio engine is started, a message with the selector “dsp”
is sent to each object. Each class that has a method for the
“dsp”-message is recognised as signal class.
*Always* mark the arguments following the “dsp” selector as ``A_CANT``,
as this will make it impossible to manually send an *illegal* ``dsp``
message to the object, triggering a crash.

Signal classes that want to provide signal-inlets have to declare this
via the ``CLASS_MAINSIGNALIN``-macro. This enables signals at the first
(default) inlet. If more than one signal-inlet is needed, they have to
be created explicitly in the constructor-method.

Inlets that are declared as signal-inlets cannot provide methods for
``t_float``-messages any longer.

The first argument of the macro is a pointer to the signal class. The
second argument is the type of the class’s data space.

The last argument is a dummy-variable out of the data space that is
needed to replace non-existing signal at the signal-inlet(s) with
``t_float``-messages.

construction of signal-inlets and -outlets
------------------------------------------

::

    void *pan_tilde_new(t_floatarg f)
    {
      t_pan_tilde *x = (t_pan_tilde *)pd_new(pan_tilde_class);

      x->f_pan = f;

      x->x_in2 = inlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->x_obj.ob_pd, &s_signal, &s_signal);
      x->x_in3 = floatinlet_new (&x->x_obj, &x->f_pan);

      x->x_out = outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_signal);

      return (void *)x;
    }

Additional signal-inlets are added like other inlets with the routine
``inlet_new``. The last two arguments are references to the symbolic
selector “signal” in the lookup-table.

Signal-outlets are also created like normal (message-)outlets, by
setting the outlet-selector to “signal”.

The newly created inlets/outlets are “user-allocated” data. Pd will keep
track of all the resources it automatically creates (like the default
inlet), and will eventually free these resources once they are no longer
needed. However, if we request an “extra” resource (like the additional
inlets/outlets in this example; or - more commonly - memory that is
allocated via ``malloc`` or similar), we have to make sure ourselves,
that these resources are freed when no longer needed. If we fail to do
so, we will invariably create a dreaded *memory leak*.

Therefore, we store the “handles” to the newly created inlets/outlets as
returned by the ``..._new`` routines for later use.

DSP-methods
-----------

Whenever Pd’s audio engine is turned on, all signal-objects declare
their perform-routines that are to be added to the DSP-tree.

The “dsp”-method has two arguments, the pointer to the class-data space,
and a pointer to an array of signals. The signal array consists of the
input signals (from left to right) and then the output signals (from
left to right).

::

    void pan_tilde_dsp(t_pan_tilde *x, t_signal **sp)
    {
      dsp_add(pan_tilde_perform, 5, x,
              sp[0]->s_vec, sp[1]->s_vec, sp[2]->s_vec, sp[0]->s_n);
    }

``dsp_add`` adds a *perform*-routine (as declared in the first argument)
to the DSP-tree.

The second argument is the number of the following pointers to diverse
variables. Which pointers to which variables are passed is not limited.

Here, sp[0] is the first in-signal, sp[1] represents the second
in-signal and sp[2] points to the out-signal.

The structure ``t_signal`` contains a pointer to the its signal-vector
``().s_vec`` (an array of samples of type ``t_sample``), and the length
of this signal-vector ``().s_n``.

Since all signal vectors of a patch (not including it’s sub-patches) are
of the same length, it is sufficient to get the length of one of these
vectors.

Since an object doesn't know its *perform*-routine's signal-vector
length until the "dsp"-method, this would be the place to allocate
temporary buffers to store intermediate dsp computations. See:
*getbytes*.

perform-routine
---------------

The perform-routine is the DSP-heart of each signal class.

A pointer to an integer-array is passed to it. This array contains the
pointers, that were passed via ``dsp_add``, which must be cast back to
their real type.

The perform-routine has to return a pointer to integer, that points to
the address behind the stored pointers of the routine. This means, that
the return argument equals the argument of the perform-routine plus the
number of pointer variables (as declared as the second argument of
``dsp_add``) plus one.

::

    t_int *pan_tilde_perform(t_int *w)
    {
      t_pan_tilde *x = (t_pan_tilde *)(w[1]);
      t_sample  *in1 =    (t_sample *)(w[2]);
      t_sample  *in2 =    (t_sample *)(w[3]);
      t_sample  *out =    (t_sample *)(w[4]);
      int          n =           (int)(w[5]);

      t_sample f_pan = (x->f_pan<0)?0.0:(x->f_pan>1)?1.0:x->f_pan;

      while (n--) *out++ = (*in1++)*(1-f_pan)+(*in2++)*f_pan;

      return (w+6);
    }

Each sample of the signal vectors is read and manipulated in the
``while``-loop.

Optimisation of the DSP-tree tries to avoid unnecessary copy-operations.
Therefore it is possible, that in- and out-signal are located at the
same address in the memory. In this case, the programmer has to be
careful not to write into the out-signal before having read the
in-signal to avoid overwriting data that is not yet saved.

destructor
----------

::

    void pan_tilde_free(t_pan_tilde *x)
    {
      inlet_free(x->x_in2);
      inlet_free(x->x_in3);
      outlet_free(x->x_out);
    }

If our object has some dynamically allocated resources (usually this is
dynamically allocated memory), we must free them manually in the
“free-method” (aka: destructor).

In the example above, we do so by calling ``inlet_free`` (resp.
``outlet_free``) on the handles to our additional iolets.

NOTE: we do not really need to free inlets and outlet. As Pd will
automatically free them for us (unless we are doing higher-order magic,
like displaying one objects iolet as another object's. but let's not get
into that for now...)

the code: pan~
--------------

::

    #include "m_pd.h"

    static t_class *pan_tilde_class;

    typedef struct _pan_tilde {
      t_object  x_obj;
      t_sample f_pan;
      t_sample f;

      t_inlet *x_in2;
      t_inlet *x_in3;
      t_outlet*x_out;
    } t_pan_tilde;

    t_int *pan_tilde_perform(t_int *w)
    {
      t_pan_tilde *x = (t_pan_tilde *)(w[1]);
      t_sample  *in1 =    (t_sample *)(w[2]);
      t_sample  *in2 =    (t_sample *)(w[3]);
      t_sample  *out =    (t_sample *)(w[4]);
      int          n =           (int)(w[5]);
      t_sample f_pan = (x->f_pan<0)?0.0:(x->f_pan>1)?1.0:x->f_pan;

      while (n--) *out++ = (*in1++)*(1-f_pan)+(*in2++)*f_pan;

      return (w+6);
    }

    void pan_tilde_dsp(t_pan_tilde *x, t_signal **sp)
    {
      dsp_add(pan_tilde_perform, 5, x,
              sp[0]->s_vec, sp[1]->s_vec, sp[2]->s_vec, sp[0]->s_n);
    }

    void pan_tilde_free(t_pan_tilde *x)
    {
      inlet_free(x->x_in2);
      inlet_free(x->x_in3);
      outlet_free(x->x_out);
    }

    void *pan_tilde_new(t_floatarg f)
    {
      t_pan_tilde *x = (t_pan_tilde *)pd_new(pan_tilde_class);

      x->f_pan = f;
      
      x->x_in2=inlet_new(&x->x_obj, &x->x_obj.ob_pd, &s_signal, &s_signal);
      x->x_in3=floatinlet_new (&x->x_obj, &x->f_pan);
      x->x_out=outlet_new(&x->x_obj, &s_signal);

      return (void *)x;
    }

    void pan_tilde_setup(void) {
      pan_tilde_class = class_new(gensym("pan~"),
            (t_newmethod)pan_tilde_new,
            0, sizeof(t_pan_tilde),
            CLASS_DEFAULT, 
            A_DEFFLOAT, 0);

      class_addmethod(pan_tilde_class,
            (t_method)pan_tilde_dsp, gensym("dsp"), A_CANT, 0);
      CLASS_MAINSIGNALIN(pan_tilde_class, t_pan_tilde, f);
    }

Pd’s message-system
*******************

Non-audio-data are distributed via a message-system. Each message
consists of a “selector” and a list of atoms.

atoms
=====

There are three kinds of atoms:

-  *A\_FLOAT*: a numerical value (floating point)

-  *A\_SYMBOL*: a symbolic value (string)

-  *A\_POINTER*: a pointer

Numerical values are always floating point-values (``t_float``), even if
they could be displayed as integer values.

Each symbol is stored in a lookup-table for reasons of performance. The
command ``gensym`` looks up a string in the lookup-table and returns the
address of the symbol. If the string is not yet to be found in the
table, a new symbol is added.

Atoms of type *A\_POINTER* are not very important (for simple
externals).

The type of an atom ``a`` is stored in the structure-element
``a.a_type``.

selectors
=========

The selector is a symbol that defines the type of a message. There are
five predefined selectors:

-  “bang” labels a trigger event. A “bang”-message consists only of the
   selector and contains no lists of atoms.

-  “float” labels a numerical value. The list of a “float”-Message
   contains one single atom of type *A\_FLOAT*

-  “symbol” labels a symbolic value. The list of a “symbol”-Message
   contains one single atom of type *A\_SYMBOL*

-  “pointer” labels a pointer value. The list of a “pointer”-Message
   contains one single atom of type *A\_POINTER*

-  “list” labels a list of one or more atoms of arbitrary type.

Since the symbols for these selectors are used quite often, their
address in the lookup-table can be queried directly, without having to
use ``gensym``:

+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| selector     | lookup-routine          | lookup-address   |
+==============+=========================+==================+
| bang         | ``gensym("bang")``      | ``&s_bang``      |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| float        | ``gensym("float")``     | ``&s_float``     |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| symbol       | ``gensym("symbol")``    | ``&s_symbol``    |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| pointer      | ``gensym("pointer")``   | ``&s_pointer``   |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| list         | ``gensym("list")``      | ``&s_list``      |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+
| — (signal)   | ``gensym("signal")``    | ``&s_symbol``    |
+--------------+-------------------------+------------------+

Other selectors can be used as well. The receiving class has to provide
a method for a specific selector or for “anything”, which is any
arbitrary selector.

Messages that have no explicit selector and start with a numerical
value, are recognised automatically either as “float”-message (only one
atom) or as “list”-message (several atoms).

For example, messages “\ ``12.429``\ ” and “\ ``float 12.429``\ ” are
identical. Likewise, the messages “\ ``list 1 for you``\ ” is identical
to “\ ``1 for you``\ ”.


API reference
*************


Pd-types
========

Since Pd is used on several platforms, many ordinary types of variables,
like ``int``, are re-defined. To write portable code, it is reasonable
to use types provided by Pd.

Apart from this there are many predefined types, that should make the
life of the programmer simpler.

Generally, Pd-types start with ``t_``.

+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Pd-type           | description                              |
+===================+==========================================+
| ``t_atom``        | atom                                     |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_float``       | floating point value                     |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_symbol``      | symbol                                   |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_gpointer``    | pointer (to graphical objects)           |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_int``         | pointer-sized integer value              |
|                   | (do **not** use this for integers)       |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_signal``      | structure of a signal                    |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_sample``      | audio signal-value (floating point)      |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_outlet``      | outlet of an object                      |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_inlet``       | inlet of an object                       |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_object``      | object-interna                           |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_class``       | a Pd-class                               |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_method``      | class-method                             |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ``t_newmethod``   | pointer to a constructor (new-routine)   |
+-------------------+------------------------------------------+

Pd-functions
============

functions: atoms
----------------

SETFLOAT
^^^^^^^^

::

    SETFLOAT(atom, f)

This macro sets the type of ``atom`` to ``A_FLOAT`` and stores the
numerical value ``f`` in this atom.

SETSYMBOL
^^^^^^^^^

::

    SETSYMBOL(atom, s)

This macro sets the type of ``atom`` to ``A_SYMBOL`` and stores the
symbolic pointer ``s`` in this atom.

SETPOINTER
^^^^^^^^^^

::

    SETPOINTER(atom, pt)

This macro sets the type of ``atom`` to ``A_POINTER`` and stores the
pointer ``pt`` in this atom.

atom\_getfloat
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_float atom_getfloat(t_atom *a);

If the type of the atom ``a`` is ``A_FLOAT``, the numerical value of
this atom else “0.0” is returned.

atom\_getfloatarg
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_float atom_getfloatarg(int which, int argc, t_atom *argv)

If the type of the atom – that is found at in the atom-list ``argv``
with the length ``argc`` at the place ``which`` – is ``A_FLOAT``, the
numerical value of this atom else “0.0” is returned.

atom\_getint
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_int atom_getint(t_atom *a);

If the type of the atom ``a`` is ``A_FLOAT``, its numerical value is
returned as integer else “0” is returned.

atom\_getsymbol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_symbol atom_getsymbol(t_atom *a);

If the type of the atom ``a`` is ``A_SYMBOL``, a pointer to this symbol
is returned, else a null-pointer “0” is returned.

atom\_gensym
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_symbol *atom_gensym(t_atom *a);

If the type of the atom ``a`` is ``A_SYMBOL``, a pointer to this symbol
is returned.

Atoms of a different type, are “reasonably” converted into a string.
This string is – on demand – inserted into the symbol-table. A pointer
to this symbol is returned.

atom\_string
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void atom_string(t_atom *a, char *buf, unsigned int bufsize);

Converts an atom ``a`` into a C-string ``buf``. The memory to this
char-Buffer has to be reserved manually and its length has to be
declared in ``bufsize``.

gensym
^^^^^^

::

    t_symbol *gensym(char *s);

Checks, whether the C-string ``*s`` has already been inserted into the
symbol-table. If no entry exists, it is created. A pointer to the symbol
is returned.

functions: classes
------------------

class\_new
^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_class *class_new(t_symbol *name,
            t_newmethod newmethod, t_method freemethod,
            size_t size, int flags,
            t_atomtype arg1, ...);

Generates a class with the symbolic name ``name``. ``newmethod`` is the
constructor that creates an instance of the class and returns a pointer
to this instance.

If memory is reserved dynamically, this memory has to be freed by the
destructor-method ``freemethod`` (without any return argument), when the
object is destroyed.

``size`` is the static size of the class-data space, that is returned by
``sizeof(t_mydata)``.

``flags`` define the presentation of the graphical object. A (more or
less arbitrary) combination of following objects is possible:



.. raw:: html

   <table>

.. raw:: html

   <thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="header">

.. raw:: html

   <th align="left">

flag

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th align="left">

description

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </thead>

.. raw:: html

   <tbody>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="odd">

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

CLASS\_DEFAULT

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

a normal object with one inlet

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="even">

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

CLASS\_PD

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

object (without graphical presentation) 

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="even">

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

CLASS\_GOBJ 

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

pure graphical object (like arrays, graphs,...) 

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="even">

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

CLASS\_PATCHABLE

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

a normal object (with one inlet) 

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr class="even">

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

CLASS\_NOINLET 

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td align="left">

the default inlet is suppressed

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </tbody>

.. raw:: html

   </table>


Flags the description of which is printed in *italic* are of small
importance for writing externals.

The remaining arguments ``arg1,...`` define the types of
object-arguments passed at the creation of a class-object. A maximum of
six type checked arguments can be passed to an object. The list of
argument-types are terminated by “0”.

Possible types of arguments are:

+-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_DEFFLOAT``    | a numerical value                               |
+-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_DEFSYMBOL``   | a symbolical value                              |
+-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_GIMME``       | a list of atoms of arbitrary length and types   |
+-------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

If more than six arguments are to be passed, ``A_GIMME`` has to be used
and a manual type-check has to be made.

class\_addmethod
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addmethod(t_class *c, t_method fn, t_symbol *sel,
        t_atomtype arg1, ...);

Adds a method ``fn`` for a selector ``sel`` to a class ``c``.

The remaining arguments ``arg1,...`` define the types of the list of
atoms that follow the selector. A maximum of six type-checked arguments
can be passed. If more than six arguments are to be passed, ``A_GIMME``
has to be used and a manual type-check has to be made.

The list of arguments is terminated by “0”.

Possible types of arguments are:

+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_DEFFLOAT``    | a numerical value (default to '0')               |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_FLOAT``       | an obligatory numerical value (no default value) |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_DEFSYMBOL``   | a symbolic value (default to '')                 |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_SYMBOL``      | an obligatory symbol value                       |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_POINTER``     | a pointer                                        |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_GIMME``       | a list of atoms of arbitrary length and types    |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ``A_CANT``        | no possible atoms (used for internal messages    |
|                   | which would crash Pd when called by the user     |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+

class\_addbang
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addbang(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for “bang”-messages to the class ``c``.

The argument of the “bang”-method is a pointer to the class-data space:

``void my_bang_method(t_mydata *x);``

class\_addfloat
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addfloat(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for “float”-messages to the class ``c``.

The arguments of the “float”-method is a pointer to the class-data space
and a floating point-argument:

``void my_float_method(t_mydata *x, t_floatarg f);``

class\_addsymbol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addsymbol(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for “symbol”-messages to the class ``c``.

The arguments of the “symbol”-method is a pointer to the class-data
space and a pointer to the passed symbol:

``void my_symbol_method(t_mydata *x, t_symbol *s);``

class\_addpointer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addpointer(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for “pointer”-messages to the class ``c``.

The arguments of the “pointer”-method is a pointer to the class-data
space and a pointer to a pointer:

``void my_pointer_method(t_mydata *x, t_gpointer *pt);``

class\_addlist
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addlist(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for “list”-messages to the class ``c``.

The arguments of the “list”-method are – apart from a pointer to the
class-data space – a pointer to the selector-symbol (always
``&s_list``), the number of atoms and a pointer to the list of atoms:

``void my_list_method(t_mydata *x,``

``t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv);``

class\_addanything
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_addanything(t_class *c, t_method fn);

Adds a method ``fn`` for an arbitrary message to the class ``c``.

The arguments of the anything-method are – apart from a pointer to the
class-data space – a pointer to the selector-symbol, the number of atoms
and a pointer to the list of atoms:

``void my_any_method(t_mydata *x,``

``t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv);``

class\_addcreator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

     void class_addcreator(t_newmethod newmethod, t_symbol *s, 
        t_atomtype type1, ...);

Adds a creator-symbol ``s``, alternative to the symbolic class name, to
the constructor ``newmethod``. Thus, objects can be created either by
their “real” class name or an alias-name (p.e. an abbreviation, like the
internal “float” resp. “f”).

The “0”-terminated list of types corresponds to that of ``class_new``.

class\_sethelpsymbol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void class_sethelpsymbol(t_class *c, t_symbol *s);

If a Pd-object is right-clicked, a help-patch for the corresponding
object class can be opened. By default this is a patch with the symbolic
class name in the directory “\ *doc/5.reference/*\ ”.

The name of the help-patch for the class that is pointed to by ``c`` is
changed to the symbol ``s``.

Therefore, several similar classes can share a single help-patch.

Path-information is relative to the default help path
*doc/5.reference/*.

pd\_new
^^^^^^^

::

    t_pd *pd_new(t_class *cls);

Generates a new instance of the class ``cls`` and returns a pointer to
this instance.

functions: inlets and outlets
-----------------------------

All routines for inlets and outlets need a reference to the
object-interna of the class-instance. When instantiating a new object,
the necessary data space-variable of the ``t_object``-type is
initialised. This variable has to be passed as the ``owner``-object to
the various inlet- and outlet-routines.

inlet\_new
^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_inlet *inlet_new(t_object *owner, t_pd *dest,
          t_symbol *s1, t_symbol *s2);

Generates an additional “active” inlet for the object that is pointed at
by ``owner``. Generally, ``dest`` points at “\ ``owner.ob_pd``\ ”.

The selector ``s1`` at the new inlet is substituted by the selector
``s2``.

If a message with selector ``s1`` appears at the new inlet, the
class-method for the selector ``s2`` is called.

This means

-  The substituting selector has to be declared by ``class_addmethod``
   in the setup-routine.

-  It is possible to simulate a certain right inlet, by sending a
   message with this inlet’s selector to the leftmost inlet.

   Using an empty symbol (``gensym("")``) as selector makes it
   impossible to address a right inlet via the leftmost one.

-  It is not possible to add methods for more than one selector to a
   right inlet. Particularly it is not possible to add a universal
   method for arbitrary selectors to a right inlet.

floatinlet\_new
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_inlet *floatinlet_new(t_object *owner, t_float *fp);

Generates a new “passive” inlet for the object that is pointed at by
``owner``. This inlet enables numerical values to be written directly
into the memory ``fp``, without calling a dedicated method.

symbolinlet\_new
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_inlet *symbolinlet_new(t_object *owner, t_symbol **sp);

Generates a new “passive” inlet for the object that is pointed at by
``owner``. This inlet enables symbolic values to be written directly
into the memory ``*sp``, without calling a dedicated method.

pointerinlet\_new
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_inlet *pointerinlet_new(t_object *owner, t_gpointer *gp);

Generates a new “passive” inlet for the object that is pointed at by
``owner``. This inlet enables pointer to be written directly into the
memory ``gp``, without calling a dedicated method.

outlet\_new
^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_outlet *outlet_new(t_object *owner, t_symbol *s);

Generates a new outlet for the object that is pointed at by ``owner``.
The Symbol ``s`` indicates the type of the outlet.

+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| symbol      | symbol-address    | outlet-type         |
+=============+===================+=====================+
| “bang”      | ``&s_bang``       | message (bang)      |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| “float”     | ``&s_float``      | message (float)     |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| “symbol”    | ``&s_symbol``     | message (symbol)    |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| “pointer”   | ``&s_gpointer``   | message (pointer)   |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| “list”      | ``&s_list``       | message (list)      |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| —           | 0                 | message             |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+
| “signal”    | ``&s_signal``     | signal              |
+-------------+-------------------+---------------------+

There are no real differences between outlets of the various
message-types. At any rate, it makes code more easily readable, if the
use of outlet is shown at creation-time. For outlets for any messages a
null-pointer is used. Signal-outlet must be declared with ``&s_signal``.

Variables if the type ``t_object`` provide pointer to one outlet.
Whenever a new outlet is generated, its address is stored in the object
variable ``(*owner).ob_outlet``.

If more than one message-outlet is needed, the outlet-pointers that are
returned by ``outlet_new`` have to be stored manually in the data space
to address the given outlets.

outlet\_bang
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_bang(t_outlet *x);

Outputs a “bang”-message at the outlet specified by ``x``.

outlet\_float
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_float(t_outlet *x, t_float f);

Outputs a “float”-message with the numeric value ``f`` at the outlet
specified by ``x``.

outlet\_symbol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_symbol(t_outlet *x, t_symbol *s);

Outputs a “symbol”-message with the symbolic value ``s`` at the outlet
specified by ``x``.

outlet\_pointer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_pointer(t_outlet *x, t_gpointer *gp);

Outputs a “pointer”-message with the pointer ``gp`` at the outlet
specified by ``x``.

outlet\_list
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_list(t_outlet *x,
                     t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv);

Outputs a “list”-message at the outlet specified by ``x``. The list
contains ``argc`` atoms. ``argv`` points to the first element of the
atom-list.

Independent of the symbol ``s``, the selector “list” will precede the
list.

To make the code more readable, ``s`` should point to the symbol list
(either via ``gensym("list")`` or via ``&s_list``)

outlet\_anything
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void outlet_anything(t_outlet *x,
                         t_symbol *s, int argc, t_atom *argv);

Outputs a message at the outlet specified by ``x``.

The message-selector is specified with ``s``. It is followed by ``argc``
atoms. ``argv`` points to the first element of the atom-list.

functions: DSP
--------------

If a class should provide methods for digital signal-processing, a
method for the selector “dsp” (followed by no atoms) has to be added to
this class

Whenever Pd’s audio engine is started, all objects that provide a
“dsp”-method are identified as instances of signal classes.

DSP-method
^^^^^^^^^^

::

    void my_dsp_method(t_mydata *x, t_signal **sp)

In the “dsp”-method a class method for signal-processing is added to the
DSP-tree by the function ``dsp_add``.

Apart from the data space ``x`` of the object, an array of signals is
passed. The signals in the array are arranged from left to right, first
the inlets, then the outlets..

In case there are both two in- and out-signals, this means:

+-----------+--------------------+
| pointer   | to signal          |
+===========+====================+
| sp[0]     | left in-signal     |
+-----------+--------------------+
| sp[1]     | right in-signal    |
+-----------+--------------------+
| sp[2]     | left out-signal    |
+-----------+--------------------+
| sp[3]     | right out-signal   |
+-----------+--------------------+

The signal structure contains apart from other things:

+---------------------+--------------------------------+
| structure-element   | description                    |
+=====================+================================+
| ``s_n``             | length of the signal vector    |
+---------------------+--------------------------------+
| ``s_vec``           | pointer to the signal vector   |
+---------------------+--------------------------------+

The signal vector is an array of samples of type ``t_sample``.

perform-routine
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    t_int *my_perform_routine(t_int *w)

A pointer ``w`` to an array (of integer) is passed to the
perform-routine that is inserted into the DSP-tree by ``class_add``.

In this array the pointers that are passed via ``dsp_add`` are stored.
These pointers have to be cast back to their original type.

The first pointer is stored at ``w[1]`` !!!

The perform-routine has to return a pointer to integer, that points
directly behind the memory, where the object’s pointers are stored. This
means, that the return-argument equals the routine’s argument ``w`` plus
the number of used pointers (as defined in the second argument of
``dsp_add``) plus one.

CLASS\_MAINSIGNALIN
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    CLASS_MAINSIGNALIN(<class_name>, <class_data>, <f>);

The macro ``CLASS_MAINSIGNALIN`` declares, that the class will use
signal-inlets.

The first macro-argument is a pointer to the signal-class. The second
argument is the type of the class-data space. The third argument is a
(dummy-)floating point-variable of the data space, that is needed to
automatically convert “float”-messages into signals if no signal is
present at the signal-inlet.

No “float”-methods can be used for signal-inlets, that are created this
way.

dsp\_add
^^^^^^^^

::

    void dsp_add(t_perfroutine f, int n, ...);

Adds the perform-routine ``f`` to the DSP-tree. The perform-routine is
called at each DSP-cycle.

The second argument ``n`` defines the number of following
pointer-arguments

Which pointers to which data are passed is not limited. Generally,
pointers to the data space of the object and to the signal-vectors are
reasonable. The length of the signal-vectors should also be passed to
manipulate signals effectively.

dsp\_addv
^^^^^^^^^

::

    void dsp_addv(t_perfroutine f, int n, t_int *vec);

Adds the perform-routine ``f`` to the DSP-tree. The perform-routine is
called at each DSP-cycle.

The second argument, ``n``, defines the number of arguments passed in
the third argument ``vec``.

The third argument, ``vec``, holds the pointers to the data to be passed
to the perform routine ``f``.

This method performs the same operation as *dsp\_add* but is more
flexible because its array can be manipulated at run-time based on
attributes of the object. This is how you would create an object with a
variable amount of inputs and/or outputs.

sys\_getsr
^^^^^^^^^^

::

    float sys_getsr(void);

Returns the sample-rate of the system.

sys\_getblksize
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    int sys_getblksize(void);

Returns the system top level dsp block size.

*Note*: this isn't necessarily the same as the length of the
signal-vector that a signal object is expected to execute on. A switch~
or block~ object might change that. An object's "dsp"-method has access
to the signal-vectors and the *s\_n* entry of any of the t\_signal's
passed in give the length of the signal-vector the dsp *perform*-routine
will execute on.

functions: memory
-----------------

getbytes
^^^^^^^^

::

    void *getbytes(size_t nbytes);

Reserves ``nbytes`` bytes and returns a pointer to the allocated memory.

copybytes
^^^^^^^^^

::

    void *copybytes(void *src, size_t nbytes);

Copies ``nbytes`` bytes from ``*src`` into a newly allocated memory. The
address of this memory is returned.

freebytes
^^^^^^^^^

::

    void freebytes(void *x, size_t nbytes);

Frees ``nbytes`` bytes at address ``*x``.

functions: output
-----------------

post
^^^^

::

    void post(char *fmt, ...);

Writes a C-string to the Pd-console.

error
^^^^^

::

    void error(char *fmt, ...);

Writes a C-string as an error-message to the Pd-console.

pd_error
^^^^^^^^

::

    void pd_error(void object*, char *fmt, ...);

Writes a C-string as an error-message to the Pd-console.
The error message is associated with the object that emitted it,
so you can <kbd>Control</kbd>-Click the error message to highlight the object
(or find it via the Pd-menu *Find->Find last error*)

The `object` must point to your instance.
